So, what does it take to help someone become firmly grounded in the truth?
Let's focus on three things.
Cooperating with divine direction, loving the truth, and loving people who love the truth.
Let's go back to the year 50CE and see what we can learn from Paul's ministry in Macedonia.
Now, Paul began his second missionary tour around 49CE.
In Listera, he and Silas found Timothy, who Paul met, on his first visit.
But now, Timothy is ready to accompany them on their journey.
From map B13 in your study Bible, you can see that they visited Iconium and Pasidian Antioch.
But then you see the big purple swoop, purple representing Paul's second journey.
The map indicates no stops between Antioch and Troas, just a swoop.
What does it represent?
Obedience to divine direction.
Acts 16-8 through 10 tells us that they tried to preach in Asia, but were forbidden by Holy Spirit.
Then they tried to preach in Bethinia, but again Jesus used the Holy Spirit to block them.
So they turned west and went all the way to Troas on the coast.
This is where they met up with Luke, and it's in Troas that they received divine direction to step over into Macedonia.
They wasted no time, they stepped onto a ship, and they sailed over to Macedonia.
It's now spring or early summer, 50 CE.
Within a year, Paul formed congregations in Philippi, Thessalonica, and Berea, cities of Macedonia.
But how did he do it?
It's turned to Acts chapter 17, and here we see Paul's love for the truth, shine through Acts chapter 17.
I begin in verse 1.
They now traveled through Ampifilus, and Apollonia, and came to Thessalonica, where there was a synagogue of the Jews.
So according to Paul's custom, he went inside to them, and for three Sabbaths, he reasoned with them from the Scriptures, explaining and proving by references that it was necessary for the Christ to suffer and to rise from the dead.
Today's text.
Well, here we see Paul in the synagogue in Thessalonica.
He has their attention. Why?
He's using God's inspired word. Paul loves these truths. You can see it in his eyes, and he's forming an attachment for these new disciples.
Is Jason in this picture?
Aristarchus, Demus, Secundus, all those believers came from Thessalonica, but there's a problem.
This was not Paul's synagogue, and the Jews were getting jealous.
At Acts chapter 17 and verse 5, they began persecuting the new believers.
Persecution.
Paul had been opposed in Philippi, and now here in Thessalonica as he would be in Berea as well, in short order he would be whisked away from Macedonia altogether.
So to stabilize those new congregations, Paul left Luke in Philippi, Silas, in Berea, and Timothy in Thessalonica.
With trained representatives in each new congregation, could Paul now forget about Macedonia?
Well, turn with me please to 1 Thessalonians chapter 2 and verse 17.
This is where we see Paul's love for the brothers.
When Timothy came to Paul and Corinth and reported on the brothers in Thessalonica, it moved Paul to write,
what was very likely his first inspired letter, and in this letter he reveals where his heart was, 1 Thessalonians 2, 17.
When we were separated, that's a powerful word, associated with parents bereaved of their children, indicating the strong bond Paul felt for his spiritual family.
And we were separated from you, brothers, for just a short time, in person, not in our hearts.
Yes, Paul's heart was still with the congregation in Thessalonica.
In fact, he reveals, because of our strong desire, we made every effort to see you in person.
For this reason, we wanted to come to you. Yes, I, Paul, tried, not just once but twice.
But yet Satan cut across our path.
Well, by this point, Paul had tried to go back twice, but his efforts were hindered.
Would he mistake that as divine indication that his work in Macedonia was finished?
No. Paul knew the difference between divine direction and satanic opposition.
And he did not give up. Impaled by Jehovah's Spirit, Paul wrote this letter.
And in his love for the congregation, and with his love for the truth, he reminds the Thessalonians of their hope.
In verse 19, he mentions Christ's presence. In this one brief letter, he talks about Christ's presence more than he would in all 13 of his other inspired letters combined.
Why? Because these persecuted Christians in Thessalonica needed to be reminded of their hope.
They needed to wear it like a helmet and let it guard their thinking.
And the encouragement worked. So, Satan used a different tactic.
Speculators tried to twist, Paul's word. Why did he mention Christ's presence so much?
Might this prove that the presence has already begun? Possibly there was even a letter wrongly attributed to Paul that was being interpreted to mean that the day of Jehovah had arrived.
Well, what could Paul do about this? He wrote his second inspired letter.
When it he had managed the brothers not to be quickly shaken from their reason, because Jehovah's Day would not come unless the apostasy comes first.
The apostasy. Those words, completely harmonized with Jesus' illustration about the wheat and the weeds.
The prophecy recorded in Matthew's Gospel, which had been in circulation for nearly 10 years when Paul wrote second Thessalonians.
It's also in second Thessalonians that we learn that this apostasy would eventually set in because people did not accept the love of the truth.
Meanwhile, though, Paul and the other apostles would act as a restraint against apostasy by fostering love for the truth.
Yes, by Paul's example, in constantly meditating on the scriptures, reasoning from them, explaining them, and proving with references he equipped the brothers to withstand the opposition, they would face.
As it turns out, Paul did return to Macedonia two more times, and what did he find?
Strong congregations, exemplary in their love, unselfish in their generosity, giving even beyond their actual ability, their example, inspires Christians to this very day.
So what does it take to help others become well-grounded in the truth, persistence in obeying divine direction, helping others to love the truth as we do, and loving those who love the truth, even when we're separated by circumstances remaining attached at heart?
May we continue to follow this example of genuine love as we carry out our sacred service today.